Moderating In Depth

Introduction

Conferences are one of the main functions of CIX and each conference must
have at least one Moderator. The Moderator's role is very important and,
when carried out correctly, will make the conference work very well.

This part of the CIX manual serves as a guide to Moderators - tips on how
to run an efficient and successful conference, as well as how to perform
the various Moderator functions.

Before You Begin

Types Of Conferences

There are three types of conference available on CIX. Open conferences can
be joined by any one, purely by entering the JOIN command. There is no
restriction on membership. When a user does SHOW ALL, the conference name
is displayed with an o (for Open) in front of it.

Closed conferences require that the Moderator adds participants with the
ADD PARTICIPANT command. This allows the Moderator control over membership.
The Moderator should be prepared to accept requests for membership via the
CIX mail system. Closed conferences are ideal for committees and working
groups to discuss matters which are best not discussed in the public
arena. The conference name is displayed, when the user does SHOW ALL, with
a c (for Closed) in front of it.

Confidential conferences are like closed conferences except that the name
is not displayed when a user does SHOW ALL. This is for confidential
discussions which are of no general interest.

Choose your conference type carefully. For example a conference on 'pets'
should be open, whereas a discussion between CIX users on beta-testing a
new product should be closed or confidential.

Some Words Of Advice

The most important thing to do before starting a new conference is to 'Look
before you leap'! You should firstly be sure that there is sufficient
interest in the subject to be covered in the conference, and that the
subject is not already covered well enough elsewhere. Many of the inert
conferences on CIX would probably have been better served by a single
topic within a larger conference of greater scope. For example there is no
point in creating a new conference to discuss an obscure language compiler
when you are the only person you know who uses it! Far better to have
asked for a new topic in the language conference covering all versions of
your favourite language. Join a conference on CIX called conference, there
is a topic here called suggestions in which you can ask other users if
there is any call to set up a particular conference. There is also a topic
in conference called announcements, this is where you tell all CIX users
about any new conference you have set up.

A final thing you should realise is that moderating a conference is
something that takes a great deal of time and effort to do well. If you are
not a regular CIX caller then there is simply no point in attempting it, as
users will very soon become irritated at the delays before uploaded files
are made available, and messages to you are answered. You will very soon
find yourself the only 'active' conference member. If you cannot be sure
that you will be around for maintenance regularly, then you should perhaps
give consideration to co-moderating instead.

Keeping The Pot Boiling

It is quite likely that a new conference will need to be stirred up quite
regularly in its early days if it is to germinate properly. To do this you
should reply to as many messages as possible, and also start up as many
conversations as you can manage yourself.

One lesson you quickly learn is that 'beginners' are worth their weight in
gold. Quite often they are nervous about speaking up for fear of sounding
stupid before such 'learned' company. Far from it! It is often these basic
questions that gets a discussion going, and can often end up in greater
enlightenment for those who thought their understanding was enough
already.

It helps to be quite opinionated, as this encourages participants with
opposing views to join in a discussion against you, however you should at
all times try to be constructive in your comments. Attacking the favourite
pastime or product of another participant does not always encourage
discussion. It may only encourage that person to go elsewhere.

In the same vein, you should watch out for offensive or abusive message
left by other participants. Remove these messages immediately, and without
comment. Making a comment (except perhaps, privately, by mail) simply
draws attention to the offensive nature of the message. Abusive messages
can often result from raging discussion, in which case the participant
responsible is not particularly useful. On occasion however a forum such
as CIX attracts what can only be described as a 'nut', who will leave
offensive messages at random in whatever conference comes to view.

Creating A Conference

The Conference Topics

Having decided to start a new conference, you need to decide what the
topics will be. Most conferences will benefit by starting off with these
four, but of course its up to you:-

digest         A read only topic updated regularly, which contains a
               summary of the activity in other topics. This allows late
               comers to your conference to find messages of particular
               importance to them, and also to bring themselves quickly up
               to date with the kind of subjects covered so far.
general        This topic will be used for general discussion related to
               the subject matter of the conference.
long.messages  You should not encourage users to leave very long messages
               in the general area. This tends to irritate readers who are
               not interested in the particular subject under discussion.
               Long messages are best uploaded as files into the file area
               and referenced in the general topic.
files          Where files related to the conference are kept, both in the
               flist and in the message area.

Creating Your Conference

The general Moderator command is MODERATE or MOD which you type at the
Main: prompt. To create a new conference called Building the command is:-

Main: mod new building

CIX will firstly ask if you want the conference to be Closed and, if you
do, asks if you wish it to be Confidential as well.

CIX will prompt you for names and descriptions of the initial topics in
your conference. Use the topic names outlined above as a guide. You will be
asked for each topic whether you wish to keep files there. The only initial
topic where this will be the case is with the 'files' topic.

Finally, you will want to make the 'digest' topic read only, because you
are the only person who will be leaving messages there. To do this you
type:

Mod: rdonly digest

Having created all of the initial topics you should then leave an
introductory message in each. These basically just say 'hello and this is
what this topic is all about'.

Here is an example of someone setting up a conference called Building using
the conference name and topics mentioned above.

Main: mod new building
Closed (y/n)? n
Enter one line conference description.
Description: For builders to exchange info and tips.
Topicname: digest
Do you want to keep files here (y/n)? n
Description of digest: Find the info you want quickly
Quit or another topicname: general
Do you want to keep files here (y/n)? n
Description of general: General stuff about building
Quit or another topicname: files
Do you want to keep files here (y/n)? y
Description of files: Upload files for Builders here.
Quit or another topicname: quit
Use 'Add Participants' to add initial members.
Mod: rdonly digest

Moderating Conferences

Ok, now you have set the conference up, you may want to add an initial
'float' of conference participants, in order to get the discussions going.
Do this using the ADD PARTICIPANT <username> command, i.e.

Mod: add participant mat fthorn sthorn

as you see it is possible to add several participants with a single ADD
PART command. Be very careful who you add to a conference, some people
don't like to be added by the Moderator, they prefer to JOIN themselves or
(in the case of a Closed conference) to ask before being added.

Later on in the conference's life, you may be asked to add further topics.
This is very easy, just use the command ADD TOPIC and CIX will ask you for
a topic to add.

To leave the Moderator sub-system simply type Q at the Mod: prompt, you
will find yourself back to wherever you called the Moderator sub-system
from. To get back into the moderating sub-system, you just type MOD when
you are in the conference / topic you want to moderate. You may also type
MOD <confname> from the Main: prompt if you wish.

Withdrawing Messages

As Moderator of the conference, you are free to withdraw messages which you
feel are not relevant to the topic, and allow you to maintain a level of
control over the conference proceedings. You can do this while you are
reading the conference normally, with the WITHDRAW command (e.g. WITHDRAW
123 marks message 123 as 'deleted by Moderator')

Conference Note

When you SHOW a conference, you sometimes get extra text, telling you about
the conference in more detail than just a list of topics. This is called
the Conference note. As Moderator you can create and edit this text by
typing NOTE at the Mod: prompt. You will then be placed in the standard
editor and can enter the text.

Voting System

Many people asked for a way of taking a 'straw poll' of opinions on CIX. To
this end, we have added the Voting messages. These are denoted by the words
'Voting Message' in the header. They are not meant for life and death
decisions, but purely as an opinion tester.

ONLY the Moderator may create a voting message. This is done with the VOTE
command at the Mod: prompt. Enter VOTE and CIX will prompt for a topic.
Enter a topic and then CIX will prompt for a message number. Enter a
message number. (This cannot be a deleted message). CIX will redisplay the
message. You can then enter 9 lines of up to 40 characters of options, and
to finish the list, enter the word QUIT. You then have a chance to modify
any of the lines (But at present, you cannot add or delete options). Once
you are happy, answer 'yes' to the 'Do you want to change..' question and
CIX will prompt you again to make sure you are happy with what you have
set up. (Answer 'no' and you are returned to the Mod: prompt).

Note 1: this is a one time only routine. You cannot overwrite existing
voting options or edit them.

Note 2: if you are keeping Files in that topic, you will notice with the
FDIR command files by the names like 10.opts, 10.vots. These are the
voting administration files. DON'T delete them or add them to the Flist.

Adding And Removing Moderators

You may need help moderating your conference. You do this by adding a Co-
moderator, or Co-moderators who have exactly the same authority in the
conference as you do. To add a Co-moderator type COMOD <username> from the
Mod: prompt, to remove a Co-moderator type EXMOD <username> from the Mod:
prompt. 

Files In Conferences

File Maintenance

Now you have a conference, what about putting some files in it for people
to download. Keeping with our example conference called building, we have
set up a topic called files in which we have said we want to keep files.
The first step is of course to upload some files into it. To do this you
would just join the building conference as normal, choose the files topic
and type FUL to upload the file (see the chapter Files in Depth for more
information). Conference participants may also upload files to a conference
topic, and it is one of the functions of the moderator to watch for this
and to make the file available for download after checking that the file is
intact, and that the participant was entitled to upload it.

Once a file has been uploaded, to make it available to other participants,
you will have to add a line to a text file that says where the file is,
what its called and a description of what it does. This file is called the
Flist, but more about that later.

Files on CIX may be stored in two places, the first is the conference topic
it was originally uploaded to. If you are a Moderator of the conference
you are currently joined to, you can get a list of files using the FDIR
command from the Read: prompt. These are files that have been uploaded, but
are unavailable to participants, until the file name appears in the Flist.
These files can only be made available for download from the topic they
are in. As the lists of files in your topics gets larger, you may find it
hard keeping track of the files in the FDIR list which already appear in
the participants file list (FLIST). There is a command available to
conference Moderators called ORPHANS which is available from the Mod:
prompt. This simply lists the files in the FDIR which are not already in
the FLIST.

The second place files may be stored is called the Filepool. The Moderator
of any conference may make any files in the Filepool available. A list of
these files is available in a conference/topic called filepool/thelot,
there are a lot of files in the Filepool. An example of a program stored in
the Filepool is the file pkz110.exe which is a archiving / de-archiving
program and is required to de-archive files with an .zip extension. This
file is put, automatically, into every Flist in every conference, even
though it's only stored in one place.

To make a file available you firstly need to find out where it is. Lets
assume you want to make two files available, one you have just uploaded
called database.zip and one from the Filepool called pkunzip.exe. Next,
you need to edit the topic files list (FLIST). To do this from the Main:
prompt type:

Main: mod <confname> flist <topic>

You will be taken into the standard CIX editor with a copy of the Flist for
that topic. See Chapter 10, Editing In Depth for information on how to use
the CIX editors.

The format for making a file available is as follows:

c|<filename>|description

Note: the | is a pipe character, ASCII 124.

The c| tells CIX that the file can be found in the current topic. The
filename is of course the name of the file you want to make available. The
description is your description of the file. The c| and the filename must
be in lower case, the filename must include the file extension, if it has
one.

So, to add the two files into the file list, once inside the editor and in
appending mode, you would type:

c|database.arc|Database program for builders.
f|pkxarc.exe|Program to make database.arc usable.

Notice the f| for the file pkxarc.exe, this tells CIX that the file is
stored in the Filepool, as opposed to c| which tells CIX that the file
database.arc is stored in the current topic.

Exit from the editor and - presto! - the file is now available for
download.

You can also keep your own notes and comments in the flist (which will not
be seen by any participants) with the # symbol.

#||<comment>

And you are able to add explanatory text to your flist, first by omitting
the leading character like so:

||any text

And secondly, by using the '.' character, which unlike omitting the letter,
makes the text you enter appear indented when it is displayed to the user.
For example:

.||any text

With these commands you can format the Flist anyway you like. Here's a
simple example.

#|| My Flist (Last updated 10 July 1988)
||
||Filename	Size	Description
||==============
||
f|pk361.exe|The file packer/unpacker used by CIX.
||
c|database.arc|Database program for builders,
.|| written by John Bloggs, 10/4/89.
||
f|pkxarc.exe|Smaller version of the file unpacker.
||
||End of File List.

will appear to the user as this...

Read: flist
Filename        Size  Description
==================================
pkx361.exe      70656  The file packer/unpacker used by CIX.
database.arc    15932  Database program for builders.
pkxarc.exe      15722  Smaller version of the file unpacker.
End of the File List

As Moderator you have the ability to examine the directory for a particular
topic, to erase files, to copy files into the Filepool or to download
files which are not yet available to normal participants. These commands
are executed from the Read: prompt in the conference topic the
files you want to manipulate are in.

FDIR <filename>     Show directory for the current topic.
FDL <filename>      Download <filename> from the current topic.
FUL <filename>      Upload <filename> to the current topic.
ERA <filename>      Delete <filename> from the current topic.
REN <file1> file2>  Renames <file1> to <file2>
FEXPORT <filename>  Copy the named file into the filepool for general use.

Addendum to Moderate

Topic size

There is a limit to the size of each topic on CIX. If you want to
see how much room the messages in the current topic take up, and how
close to the limit, enter TOPICSIZE at the Mod:
prompt. The maximum size a topic can grow to at present is 2 megabytes,
we are intending to increase or abolish this limit at some time in
the near future.

Pruning conferences

Withdrawn messages are not physically deleted by CIX so if you are
running short of space in a topic, you may wish to physically remove
the withdrawn messages in that topic. To do this type PRUNE
at the Mod: prompt. The topic is temporarily made read-only
while the topic is reorganised, so you should consider doing this
at a non busy time, if possible.

Co Moderators

You should be warned that any co moderator has the same abilities
as you so can COMOD other users or even EXMOD you so make sure you
choose moderators you can trust.
